[Music]
welcome to topcast
part two of the beginning the final
chapter of the beginning of infinity
this isn't the final episode however
this is just the second
in a series called the beginning
and in last episode we were talking
about
david's idea that we should call
knowledge in science rather than calling
it scientific theories of or scientific
facts about if we just agreed
that every discovery in science every
new discovery
was another grand scientific
misconception
it would undo a lot of epistemological
problems a lot of hang-ups that people
have about following the science or
thinking that science
has settled in some way if we simply
understood and took seriously the idea
that all knowledge contains
misconception and error
and therefore called it a misconception
perhaps people would be more willing
to change their minds and search for
ways to improve
our knowledge rather than believing in
science as if it was some
religious dogma now this is true even in
mathematics as david said because
although theorems tend not to be shown
false
once they've been proven although it is
possible it is possible to find
an error in a proof this is a rare
situation
what is more common is that
mathematicians gain a deeper
understanding of certain theorems they
find that they are not as
foundational fundamental as deep as what
originally was thought in fact there's
often something
deeper there's a more general case in
mathematics
and so let me go back to the book and
reread
or just read and david writes
optimism and reason are incompatible
with the conceits that our knowledge is
nearly there in any sense or its
foundations are
yet comprehensive optimism has always
been rare and the lure of the prophetic
fallacy
strung but there have always been
exceptions
socrates famously claimed to be deeply
ignorant and popper wrote
quote from papa i believe that it would
be worth trying to learn something about
the world even if in trying to do so
we should merely learn that we do not
know much it might be well for us
all to remember that while differing
widely in the various little bits we
know
in our infinite ignorance we are all
equal
from conjectures and refutations in
1963.
infinite ignorance is a necessary
condition for there to be
infinite potential for knowledge
rejecting the idea that we are
nearly there is a necessary condition
for the avoidance of dogmatism
stagnation and tyranny pausing there
just
my reflection on that remember
papa's deep truth about
manifest truth and tyranny he said
if i can recall the doctrine that the
truth is manifest
is the root of all tyranny
and what he meant by that is that once
someone honestly believes thinks
actually true that they've got in hand
a final truth then many people will
think
that this is something that needs to be
defended with their lives
and perhaps they'd be right to do so if
in fact they had the ultimate final
truth
the holy truth this is the history of
much conflict in the world people
thinking they have the truth and they
will fight to the death
in order to preserve it and so popular
is right to say
but the doctrine that truth is manifest
is the root of all tyranny
that these epistemological debates
questions discussions are not in the
abstract
they have real world consequences if you
are a thorough going fallibilist
you're likely not going to insist on the
death of your compatriots
in order to defend a thesis which you do
not think
is the ultimate final truth but on the
other hand
those other people might but of course
that then
evokes um yeats william butler yeats the
the second coming poem i'll just read
the fame the most famous
two lines where he's he writes quote
from yeats
the best lack all conviction well the
worst are full of passionate intensity
but we don't need to go down that road
that in being
fallible us we do not have to lack
conviction
and we do not have to counter passionate
intensity
with impotent relativism we can still
claim to know what we know
and still be willing to defend the moral
ideals
and values that we think are important
for the maintenance of civilization
but we just don't have to be tyrannical
about it we don't have to go to
war over it if war is brought to us then
we should be willing to have the
conviction
to defend ourselves and enlightenment
values
okay back to the book in 1996 the
journalist john horgan
caused something of a stir with his book
the end of science
facing the limits of knowledge in the
twilight of the scientific age
in it he argued that the final truth in
all fundamental areas of science
or at least as much of it as human minds
would ever be capable of grasping
had already been discovered during the
20th century
hogan wrote that he had originally
believed science to be open-ended even
infinite
but he became convinced of the contrary
by what i would call
a series of misconceptions and bad
arguments his basic misconception was
empiricism he believed that what
distinguishes science from unscientific
fields such as literary criticism
philosophy or art
is that science has the ability to
resolve questions objectively
by comparing theories with reality while
other fields can produce only multiple
mutually incompatible interpretations of
any issue
he was mistaken in both respects as i've
explained throughout this book there is
objective truth to be found in all those
fields while finality or infallibility
cannot be found anywhere hogan accepts
from the bad philosophy of postmodern
literary criticism
its will for confusion between two kinds
of ambiguity
that can exist in philosophy and art the
first is the ambiguity of multiple true
meanings
either intended by the author or
existing because of the reach of ideas
the second is the ambiguity of
deliberate vagueness confusion
equivocation or self-contradiction the
first is an attribute of deep ideas the
second an attribute of deep
silliness by confusing them one ascribes
to the best art and philosophy the
qualities of the worst
since in that view readers viewers and
critics can attribute any meaning they
choose
to the second kind of ambiguity bad
philosophy
bad philosophy declares the same to be
true of all knowledge
all meanings are equal and none of them
is objectively true
one then has a choice between complete
nihilism or regarding all
ambiguity as a good thing in those
fields hogan chooses the latter option
he classifies art and philosophy as
ironic fields
irony being the presence of multiple
conflicting meanings in a statement
okay pausing there my reflection um so
we have
a great battle a great battle for
science is it the beginning or is it the
end
and now according to hogan here of
course things are
coming to an end and you can find more
writings of john hogan
more recently online but they basically
circled the same ideas i don't think he
has
given up on any of the the claims he
makes here at least i haven't
seen him publicly uh backtrack on
anything even though
horgan's book was published um hogan's
book was published back here well first
published
back in 96 republished again in 98 so
so that's uh more than ten years before
the the first publication the beginning
of infinity
and i know for a fact that um john hogan
interviewed
david deutsch and that interview that
wonderful interview is available online
you can i think you can find it on
youtube
i'm john horgan speaking to david
deutsch about the beginning of infinity
that's a wonderful conversation
i don't know why john horgan wasn't
convinced because certainly since that
since that discussion he has made many
of the same
points as he makes in the end of science
um and when one one point he has brought
up again
and again in his book
and in articles that he has written is a
kind of character assassination of karl
popper
i don't know why people wish to do this
much the same occurs in wittgenstein's
poker
where well to be fair fans of papa
some fans of papa who claim to have
known wittgenstein
complained that wittgenstein was not a
particularly pleasant person to get
along with
similarly fans of wittgenstein
complained that papa was a
terribly annoying person or you know he
wasn't a particularly pleasant person
but of course if you speak to fans of
papa who met papa he was a wonderfully
friendly person
i don't know what the point is of
debating this
except that it reveals something about
one's willingness to engage with the
ideas when you
start talking about the person's
supposed character
and john horgan does this in spades john
hogan's probably a nice guy i've never
met him but i know he likes to talk
about
papa's personality and so if we go to
the end of science to the chapter called
the end of philosophy
we can read about supposedly
what popper was like because john horgan
speaks about his personal encounter with
kyle popper
because he goes to interview him and so
so
because in part this series is a
is is very much very much a tribute
to the work of karl popper let's give
the other side
uh a bit of a run and so what does
john hogan say in this book about karl
popper
so he arrives um at carl's house
and i'll just read it and hogan writes
when he arrives at the house a tall
handsome woman dressed in dark pants and
shirt with short dark hair
answered the door mrs mew she was only
slightly less forbidding in person
than over the telephone as she led me
into the house she told me that sir carl
was quite tired
he had undergone a spate of interviews
and congratulations brought on by his
90th birthday the previous month
and he had been working too hard
preparing an acceptance speech
for the kyoto award known as japan's
nobel
i should expect to speak to him for only
an hour at the most
i was trying to lower my expectations
when papa made his entrance
he was stooped equipped with a hearing
aid and surprisingly short
i had assumed that the author of such
autocratic prose would be tall
yet he was as kinetic as a bantamweight
boxer
he brandished an article i had written
for scientific american about how
quantum mechanics was compelling some
physicists
to abandon the view of physics as a
wholly objective enterprise
i don't believe a word of it he declared
in an austrian-accented growl
subjectivism has no place in physics
quantum or otherwise
physics he exclaimed grabbing a book
from a table and slamming it down
is that this from a man who co-wrote her
book espousing dualism
the notion that ideas and other
constructs of the human mind exist
independently of the material world
pausing there
well papa was quite right wasn't he to
reject
subjectivism in quantum theory so i
don't know
what problem hogan has here
but he seems to be conflating this with
poppers apparently espousing
dualism i'm not sure that's entirely
true
by the way it depends on what one means
by dualism after all
i could argue the thesis that the mind
is software running on the brain which
is hardware which is a form of
dualism that there is an abstract
reality in a physical reality
dualism there is number and there are
atoms dualism
but why that why that has anything to do
with whether or not one thinks that
the laws of physics should be subjective
which is to say
the laws of physics have a place in them
for consciousness at the fundamental
level namely that your ones observing of
an experiment
affects the outcome of the experiment i
don't know but
horgan's upset about that let's go back
to the book hogan rights
of papa quote once seated
he kept darting away to forage for books
or articles that could buttress a point
striving to dredge a name or date from
his memory
he needed his temples and gritted his
teeth as if in agony
at one point when the word mutation
briefly eluded him
he slapped his forehead repeatedly and
with alarming force shouting
terms terms terms words poured from him
so rapidly and with so much momentum
that i began to lose hope that i could
ask any of my prepared questions i'm
over 90 and i can still think he
declared
as if suspecting that i doubted it he
tirelessly touted a theory
of the origin of life proposed by a
former student
gunther wuchauser a german patent
attorney who had a phd in chemistry
papa kept emphasizing that he had known
all the titans of 20th century science
einstein schrodinger heisenberg papa
blamed boar whom he knew very well for
having introduced subjectivism into
physics
ball was a marvelous physicist one of
the greatest of all time but he was a
miserable philosopher
and one couldn't talk to him he was
talking all the time allowing
practically only one or two words to you
and then at once cutting in okay pausing
in my reflection so
what horgan's saying there
is that pop is name dropping
all the while horgan talking about his
personal meeting with papa in order to
try and
characterize popper in a particular way
and further saying that this
niels bohr was a miserable philosopher
who was talking all the time never
allowing anyone to
talk at the same time so in other words
hogan's trying to say
that poppa is like neil's ball that's
the insinuation here that is the
mean unfair insinuation here
against a man who obviously cannot
defend himself
back to the book hogan writes as mrs mew
turned to leave poppa abruptly asked her
to find one of his books
she disappeared for a few minutes and
then returned empty-handed
excuse me carl i couldn't find it she
reported unless i have a description
i can't check every bookcase it was
actually i think on the right of this
corner
but i could have taken it away maybe his
voice trailed off
mrs mu somehow rolled her eyes without
really rolling them and vanished
he paused a moment and i desperately
seized the opportunity to ask a question
i wanted to ask you about yes you should
ask me your questions
i have wrongly taken the lead you can
ask me all your questions first
just pausing there this is all in quote
marks
now i don't know maybe hogan had made a
recording
it's silent on that maybe he took
copious notes maybe he has an idactic
memory i don't know
but i'm suspicious
about putting these quotes in quote
marks quotes
should be for the exact words that
somebody says
perhaps hogan's being very honest here
perhaps
let's go back to the book organ writes
as i began to question popper about his
views it became apparent that his
skeptical philosophy stemmed from a
deeply romantic
idealized view of science he thus denied
the assertion often made by the logical
positivists
that science can ever be reduced to a
formal logical system
in which raw data are methodically
converted into truth a scientific theory
popper insisted
is an invention an act of creation as
profoundly mysterious as anything in the
arts
the history of science is everywhere
speculative papa said
it is a marvelous history it makes you
proud to be a human being
framing his face in his outstretched
hands popper and toned
i believe in the human mind pausing
there my reflection well that's generous
and that's nice and i can
i can i can believe that that is
precisely
the words of papa and the way in which
he would have been excited to talk about
history and
the importance the centrality of people
okay skipping a little
back to hogan organized when i asked
popper if he thought that science was
incapable
of achieving absolute truth he exclaimed
no no
and shook his head vehemently he liked
the logical positives before him
believed that a scientific theory could
be absolutely true
in fact he had no doubt that some
scientific theories were absolutely true
although i refused to say which ones but
he rejected the positive beliefs that we
can never know
that a theory is true we must
distinguish between truths which is
objective and absolute
and certainty which is subjective you
know pausing near my reflection well
i don't know about that i would
much prefer to see that written
in one of poppa's texts as to whether
our scientific theory could be
absolutely true he had no doubt
popper had no doubt and that's in quote
marks as well so
i have some doubt that popper said no
doubt
okay okay skipping a little more and
i'll just end on this
just give you a taste of the end of
science
hogan writes of popper
quote he thus scoffed at the hope of
some scientist to achieve a complete
theory of nature
one that answers all questions quote
from poppa
many people think that the problems can
be solved many people think the opposite
i think we have gone very far but we are
much further away
i must show you one passage that bears
on this he shuffled off again
and returned with his book conjectures
and refutations opening it
he read his own words with reverence in
our infinite ignorance we are all
equal okay pausing there um i think i
might have to do
an episode painful as it could be
breaking down parts of
hogan's book i mean it really is the
antithesis
to so much that's in the beginning of
infinity
and i just think it lacks a certain
generosity
in the portrayal of papa we
why one cannot stick to i guess it's a
certain kind of book it's a narrative
but why one cannot stick to
discussing the ideas rather than
the way in which popper apparently
presented
the ideas to hogan or the mood that he
was in
so on and so forth i don't know it's all
part of this same thing that one gets
when discussing the work of karl popper
namely it is eventually brought up by
someone that he
didn't practice his own philosophy or
take his own philosophy seriously in
some way or other i don't know what the
alternative is
i mean horgan seems in some sense to
almost
understand what pop is saying but he
rejects it anyway
okay let's go back to the beginning of
infinity
and remember hogan has just
distinguished philosophy for example
from
science philosophy because in his
conception there are multiple consisting
inter
multiple existing interpretations of any
philosophical doctrine
therefore you have what's called an
ironic field in his
mind and david writes however unlike the
postmodernists
horgan thinks that science and
mathematics are the shiny exceptions to
all that
they alone are capable of non-ironic
knowledge
but there is also he concludes such a
thing as ironic science the kind of
science that cannot resolve questions
because essentially
it is just philosophy or art ironic
science can
continue indefinitely but that is
precisely because it never resolves
anything
it never discovers objective truth its
only value is in the eye of the beholder
so the future according to horgan beyond
belongs to ironic knowledge
objective knowledge has already reached
its ultimate bounds
hogan surveys some of the open questions
of fundamental science and judges them
all either ironic or non-fundamental in
support of his thesis
but that conclusion was made inevitable
by his premises alone
for consider the prospect of any future
discovery that would constitute
fundamental progress
we cannot know what it is but bad
philosophy can already split it
on principle into a new rule of thumb
and a new interpretation
or explanation the new rule of thumb
cannot possibly be fundamental it will
just be another equation
only a trained expert could tell the
difference between it and the old
equation
the new interpretation will by
definition be pure philosophy
and hence must be ironic by this method
any potential progress can be
preemptively
reinterpreted as non-progress horgan
rightly points out that his prophecy
cannot be proved false by placing it in
the context of previous
failed prophecies the fact that
mickelson was wrong about the
achievements of the 19th century
and lagrange about those of the 17th
does not employ hogan was wrong about
those of the 20th
however it so happens that our current
scientific knowledge includes a
historically unusual number of deep
fundamental problems never before in the
history of human thought has it been so
obvious
that our knowledge is tiny and our
ignorance fast and so unusually
horgan's pessimism contradicts existing
knowledge as well as being a prophetic
fallacy
for example the problem situation of
fundamental physics today
has a radically different structure from
that of
although physicists then were aware of
some phenomena
and theoretical issues which we now
recognize that
as harbingers of revolutionary
explanations to come their importance
was unclear at the time it was hard to
distinguish those harbingers
from anomalies that would eventually be
cleared up with existing explanations
plus the tweaking of the sixth place of
decimals
or minor terms in a formula but today
there is no such excuse for denying
that some of our problems are
fundamental our best theories are
telling us
of fundamental mismatches between
themselves and the reality they are
supposed to explain
pausing there my reflection on this
and and we'll leave it here for today
because david's about to go into
um some of uh
those open questions but i might just
talk about my own
uh favorite ones to do with these one of
the first real anomalies
found in fundamental physics that
suggests something
is deeply misunderstood or deeply
unknown and
we are certainly not at the end of
science is
was someone like vera rubin the
astronomer who studied the
rotation curve of galaxies how fast the
galaxy is rotating
spiral galaxies are rotating much faster
than the amount of matter that we can
see
should permit them to in other words
there's more mass
in these galaxies than we can see if we
rely upon our best explanation of
gravity
our best explanation of gravity all you
need to do
is to know the mass of something that's
orbiting or rotating
like the earth as it goes around the sun
if you know the mass of the sun you
should be able to calculate
how fast the earth is going to orbit and
indeed you can
but with the galaxy it doesn't seem to
work out that the mass that you can see
is not sufficient to cause the velocity
of the stars that are going around in
that galaxy
in other words there appears to be dark
matter
this is a huge thing this is a huge
question what is this dark matter
is there a whole zoo of new particles
out there that we cannot detect
that don't interact with anything but
gravity possible
we just don't know it's an open question
as to what the cause
of these gravitational anomalies is do
we need a new theory of gravity
either way it's very interesting now it
could be the case it could be the case
that there is a systematic error going
on with all the experiments
all the observations but there are many
different observations for example the
movement of entire clusters of galaxies
so even if you could solve in some way
the rotation
curve by fiddling with the equations for
gravity
you haven't solved various other
problems
that appear to reveal the existence of
dark matter
gravitational lensing is a very
important one
this gravitational lensing idea is you
can look at extremely distant things
like very very distant quasars
as the light passes by galaxies
that can give you a measure of the mass
in those galaxies and so even if you can
fix this
rotation curve stuff by changing your
equations of gravity that doesn't fix
this gravitational lensing problem
okay you haven't fixed that one and the
the
the so-called pattern of anisotropies in
the cosmic microwave background
radiation maps we've got a number of
those and the size of the
anisotropies these little um these
little regions
cold and dark cold and hot hotter
regions slightly hotter and slightly
colder regions
the size of those has something to do
with the amount of dark matter in the
universe as well and changing your
equations of gravity
won't fix that either and then
even more astonishing is
dark energy dark energy is a very much
an open problem
and and again unless we find their
systematic error in
all the observations that we've made
experimentally
we have this issue of what is this
energy
driving the accelerating expansion of
the universe
it used to be thought well the big bang
happened and so there is only three
options that could
uh that could occur given what we know
about gravity and given what we know
about mass
that either the big bang occurs and then
we end up with a big crunch
if the amount of matter in the universe
is sufficient to cause
the entire universe to then fall
collapse back in on on itself
the big crunch or perhaps it could be
kind of like a projectile
you throw a ball and it just expands and
then it
falls and stops okay that could be a
kind of universe where
there is a finely tuned balance between
the amount of mass and the amount of
gravity
or maybe just maybe the amount of
matte in the universe is insufficient to
cause re-collapse
and so you get this expansion that just
goes on forever and ever and ever
increasingly slowly slowly slowly and
that would seem to be
the most likely candidate that well the
first one there didn't seem to be any
evidence for this big crunch
the second one would have to be finely
tuned but the third one okay we'll just
have this
gradually slowing down but infinite
expansion the universe well
none of these three candidates none of
these three
derivations from our best theory
of cosmology big bang actually turned
out to be true
the what appears to be the case is a
massive problem
is that the universe has expanded after
the big bang and now it's taking off and
getting even faster it's expanding
faster and faster and faster all the
time is if something is
driving it additional energy is pushing
it
a force if you like almost pushing
space apart ever faster what is this
thing
next episode david uh being a real
physicist
unlike me is going to explain
some more about this and so we can go
into some detail
that'll be fun about dark energy
but for now i think we leave it here
we've we've had some depressing times
with
john horgan and we might have to do a
separate episode on him
but until next time bye-bye
[Music]
um